---
layout: post
title:  "How to deploy a PHP web application with confidence?"
date:   2020-01-24 10:24:29 +0100
categories: deploy php
comments: true
---
A long time ago, the PHP web applications were distributed throughout via FTP from local computer to remote server. This way may be fast and the result of our work is immediately.

BUT...There are big BUT.

- The process of "Deploying" hasn't feedback and test or build aren't executed before deploy the application so we can't be sure that web application has no error to production mode.
- No backup (only manually backup, if you remember do it) and no easy rollback to previously version are available.

The tool that I'm here to suggest, is called Deployer (it was written in php).

### What is Deployer

**[official documentation](https://deployer.org/docs/getting-started.html)**

Deployer manage and automate a new release distribution of the our web application.

As write before, it was written in php and it is possibile to install throught composer:

```bash
composer install deployer/deployer
```

and then, type instruction below to initialize the config file (main entry) of deployer:

```bash
./vendor/bin/deployer init
```

Usually (but not always) the config file is located in the root dir of the project and it called **deploy.php**

### Folder structure ##

- root-server-dir
    - .dep
    - releases
        - 1
        - 2
        - ...
    - shared
    - current

1. **.dep** is a hidden folder, where deployer store the releases tracking and it creates inside it a **.lock** file which it allow one deploy at a time.
2. **releases** is the folder where deployer store up to five releases in case we have to rollback to previous release becouse an error occured in the last release
3. **current** is a symbolic link to the last release
4. **shared** is the folder which manage the files or folders which have override (usually these file or folder aren't versioned by GIT)

The config file can contains many standard recipes, custom ones or override existing others

The **tasks** are the core of the deployer. They are a php function that make a specific work and they are execute in the defined order.

example:

```php
task('task-name', function () {
    run('echo "Hello world!"');
});
```

There is a way to define a context variable trhought a **set** function as below:

```php
set('variableName', 'value');
```

And then we can use them:

```php
{{variableName}}
```

If the variable already exists in the standard recipe that on we are basing to, and we re-defined it, this vartiable will be override with the new value

example. Below we re-defined the repository where our application is versioned and it will be cloned from deployer:

```php
set('repository', 'git@bitbucket.org:qweb_srl/foo-repo.git');
```

others important variables are:
* shared_files
* shared_folders

respectively they represents:
* The files that haven't to override
* The folders that haven't to override

These files or folder won't override from other version of them and they will store inside **shared** folder.

### Hosts

Another importa function in deployer is `host()`. It defines where the application will be deployed.
We can define one or more hosts, if the web app is shared from more customers or environments (production, staging etc.) 

```php
host('staging')
  ->hostname('demo.foo.it')
  ->user('demofoo')
  ->port('1234')
  ->set('deploy_path', '~/{{application}}')
  ->set('branch', 'staging');

host('prod')
  ->hostname('prod')
  ->user('foo')
  ->port('1234')
  ->set('deploy_path', '~/{{application}}')
  ->set('branch', 'master');
```

### Recipes ##

There are many availables recipes that contain the default **tasks** for common CMS, tools or frameworks like Symfony, Laravel, Magento, Wordpress, Zend, Prestashop etc.
As described above these default task can be overriden from us in the main config file **deploy.php**.

### BEFORE THIS DO THAT

We can also, specify a task which it must be execute before other one with `before()` deployer function like below:

```php
before('task-name', 'other-task-name');
```

### AFTER THIS DO THAT

Similarly to above we can define the tasks that are performed **after** another task:

```php
after('task-name', 'other-task-name');
```







